Depressive Disorders
Depressive disorders
 include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, major
depressive disorder (including major depressive episode), persistent depressive disorder,
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, substance/medication-induced depressive disorder, depressive
disorder due to another medical condition, other specified depressive disorder, and unspecified
depressive disorder. The common feature of all of these disorders is the presence of sad, empty,
or irritable mood, accompanied by related changes that significantly affect the individual’s
capacity to function (e.g., somatic and cognitive changes in major depressive disorder and
persistent depressive disorder). What differs among them are issues of duration, timing, or
presumed etiology.
In order to address concerns in the United States and, increasingly, internationally about the
potential for the overdiagnosis and treatment of bipolar disorder in children, a new diagnosis,
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, referring to the presentation of children with persistent
irritability and frequent episodes of extreme behavioral dyscontrol, is added to the depressive
disorders for children up to 12 years of age. Its placement in this chapter reflects the finding that
children with this symptom pattern typically develop unipolar depressive disorders or anxiety
disorders, rather than bipolar disorders, as they mature into adolescence and adulthood.
Major depressive disorder represents the classic condition in this group of disorders. It is
characterized by discrete episodes of at least 2 weeks’ duration (although most episodes last
considerably longer) involving clear-cut changes in affect, cognition, and neurovegetative
functions and interepisode remissions. A diagnosis based on a single episode is possible,
although the disorder is a recurrent one in the majority of cases. Careful consideration should be
given to the delineation of normal sadness and grief from a major depressive episode.
Bereavement may induce great suffering, but it does not typically induce an episode of major
depressive disorder. When they do occur together, the depressive symptoms and functional
impairment tend to be more severe and the prognosis is worse compared with bereavement that
is not accompanied by major depressive disorder. Bereavement-related major depressive
episodes tend to occur in persons with other vulnerabilities to depressive disorders.
A more chronic form of depression, persistent depressive disorder, can be diagnosed when
the mood disturbance continues for at least 2 years in adults or 1 year in children. This diagnosis,
new in DSM-5, includes the DSM-IV diagnostic categories of chronic major depression and
dysthymia.
After careful scientific review of the evidence, premenstrual dysphoric disorder has been
moved from an appendix of DSM-IV (“Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study”) to
Section II of DSM-5. Almost 20 years of additional research on this condition has confirmed a
specific and treatment-responsive form of depressive disorder that begins sometime following
ovulation and remits within a few days of menses and has a marked impact on functioning.
A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several medicalF34.81
conditions can be associated with depression-like phenomena. This fact is recognized in the
diagnoses of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder and depressive disorder due to
another medical condition.
178
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A
. 
Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g., verbal rages)
and/or behaviorally (e.g., physical aggression toward people or property) that are
grossly out of proportion in intensity or duration to the situation or provocation.
B
. 
The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.
C
. 
The temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times per week.
D
. 
The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable or angry most of the
day, nearly every day, and is observable by others (e.g., parents, teachers,
peers).
E
. 
Criteria A–D have been present for 12 or more months. Throughout that time,
the individual has not had a period lasting 3 or more consecutive months without
all of the symptoms in Criteria A–D.
F
. 
Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e., at home, at
school, with peers) and are severe in at least one of these.
G
. 
The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6 years or after
age 18 years.
H
. 
By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A–E is before 10 years.
I
. 
There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 day during which the
full symptom criteria, except duration, for a manic or hypomanic episode have
been met.
Note:
 Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs in the
context of a highly positive event or its anticipation, should not be considered as
a symptom of mania or hypomania.
J
. 
The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of major depressive
disorder and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., autism
spectrum disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder,
persistent depressive disorder).
Note:
 This diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant disorder,
intermittent explosive disorder, or bipolar disorder, though it can coexist with
others, including major depressive disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder, conduct disorder, and substance use disorders. Individuals whose
symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive mood dysregulation disorder andoppositional defiant disorder should only be given the diagnosis of disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder. If an individual has ever experienced a manic or
hypomanic episode, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
should not be assigned.
K
. 
The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
another medical or neurological condition.
Diagnostic Features
The core feature of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is chronic severe, persistent
irritability. This severe irritability has two prominent clinical manifestations, the first of which is
frequent temper outbursts. These outbursts typically occur in response to frustration and can be
verbal or behavioral (the latter in the form of aggression against property, self, or others). They
must occur frequently (i.e., on average, three or more times per week) (Criterion C) over at least
1 year in at least two settings (Criteria E and F), such as in the home and at school, and they must
be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B). The second manifestation of severe irritability
consists of chronic, persistently irritable or angry mood that is present between the severe temper
outbursts. This irritable or angry mood must be characteristic of the child, being present most of
the day, nearly every day, and noticeable by others in the child’s environment (Criterion D).
179
The clinical presentation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be carefully
distinguished from presentations of other, related conditions, particularly pediatric bipolar
disorder. In fact, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder was added to DSM-5 to address the
considerable concern about the appropriate classification and treatment of children who present
with chronic, persistent irritability relative to children who present with classic (i.e., episodic)
bipolar disorder.
Some researchers view severe, nonepisodic irritability as characteristic of bipolar disorder in
children, although both DSM-IV and DSM-5 require that both children and adults have distinct
episodes of mania or hypomania to qualify for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. During the
latter decades of the twentieth century, this contention by researchers that severe, nonepisodic
irritability is a manifestation of pediatric mania coincided with an upsurge in the rates at which
clinicians assigned the diagnosis of bipolar disorder to their pediatric patients. This sharp
increase in rates appears to be attributable to clinicians combining at least two clinical
presentations into a single category. That is, both classic, episodic presentations of mania and
nonepisodic presentations of severe irritability have been labeled as bipolar disorder in children.
In DSM-5, the term 
bipolar disorder
 is explicitly reserved for episodic presentations of bipolar
symptoms. DSM-IV did not include a diagnosis designed to capture youths whose hallmark
symptoms consisted of very severe, nonepisodic irritability, whereas DSM-5, with the inclusion
of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, provides a distinct category for such presentations.
Prevalence
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is common among children presenting to pediatricTemperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
mental health clinics. Prevalence estimates of the disorder in the community are unclear. In a
population-based cohort study of Brazilian 11-year-olds that used a specific module for
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, the prevalence was 2.5%.
Consistent gender differences in prevalence have not been reported in population samples,
although clinic samples report a male preponderance. For example, up to 80% of children
presenting to clinics in Turkey with features of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder in a chart
review were boys. Data suggest that the diagnosis may be more common in younger age groups
(e.g., 8.2% in a community sample of 6-year-olds in the United States).
Development and Course
The onset of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be before age 10 years, and the
diagnosis should not be applied to children with a developmental age of younger than 6 years. It
is unknown whether the condition presents only in this age-delimited fashion. Because the
symptoms of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are likely to change as children mature, use
of the diagnosis should be restricted to age groups similar to those in which validity has been
established (6–18 years). Approximately half of children with disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder living in a predominantly rural area in a large U.S. study continue to have symptoms
that meet criteria for the condition 1 year later, although those children whose symptoms no
longer meet the threshold for the diagnosis often have persistent, clinically impairing irritability.
Rates of conversion from severe, nonepisodic irritability to bipolar disorder are very low.
Instead, children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are at increased risk to develop
unipolar depressive and/or anxiety disorders in adulthood.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Children with chronic irritability typically exhibit complicated psychiatric
histories. In such children, a relatively extensive history of chronic irritability is common,
typically manifesting before full criteria for the syndrome are met. Such prediagnostic
presentations may have qualified for a diagnosis of oppositional defiant
180
disorder. Many children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have symptoms that also
meet criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and for an anxiety disorder,
with such diagnoses often being present from a relatively early age. For some children, the
criteria for major depressive disorder may also be met.
Factors associated with disrupted family life, such as psychological abuse or
neglect, parental psychiatric disorder, limited parental education, single-parent household, early
trauma, death of a parent, parental grief, divorce, and malnutrition (e.g., vitamin deficiency), are
associated with the core behaviors of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Data suggest that a family history of depression may be a risk factor for
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Consistent with this, twin data suggest that the
association between early irritability and later unipolar depression and anxiety may be, in part,
genetically mediated.
Compared with children with pediatric bipolar disorder or other mental illnesses, those withdisruptive mood dysregulation disorder exhibit both commonalities and differences in
information-processing deficits. For example, face-emotion labeling deficits, as well as perturbed
decision-making and cognitive control, are present in children with bipolar disorder as well as
those with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Importantly, however, the same behavioral
deficit may be associated with different patterns of neural dysfunction. There is also evidence for
disorder-specific dysfunction, such as during tasks assessing attention deployment in response to
emotional stimuli, which has demonstrated unique signs of dysfunction in children with chronic
irritability.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Culture-related data on disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are limited. However,
sociocultural factors affect the presentation of core psychological features of the disorder,
including impulsivity as well as emotion, reward, threat, and behavior dysregulation, especially
in settings characterized by severe social disruption, such as postconflict zones or communities
affected by long-standing racism and discrimination. It is important to distinguish disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder from adaptive responses to adversity that are context-dependent and
transitory.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is some evidence from twin studies that while irritability has a strong genetic component
in both sexes, patterns differ for boys and girls. For boys, genetic factors appear to account for an
increasing amount of the variance of the phenotype of irritability throughout childhood. While
genetic factors account for a large proportion of the variance of the irritability phenotype in
school-age girls, this decreases into adolescence and young adulthood, with environmental
influences playing a greater role. How this genetic risk for irritability translates into risk and
prognosis for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, per se, is not yet known.
Functional Consequences of Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Chronic, severe irritability, such as is seen in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, is
associated with marked disruption in a child’s family and peer relationships, as well as in school
performance. Because of their extremely low frustration tolerance, such children generally have
difficulty succeeding in school; they are often unable to participate in the activities typically
enjoyed by healthy children; their family life is severely disrupted by their outbursts and
irritability; and they have trouble initiating or sustaining friendships. Levels of dysfunction in
children with bipolar disorder and disruptive mood
181
dysregulation disorder are generally comparable. Both conditions cause severe disruption in the
lives of the affected individual and his or her family. In both disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder and pediatric bipolar disorder, aggression and psychiatric hospitalization are common.
Differential DiagnosisBipolar disorders.
Oppositional defiant disorder.
Because chronically irritable children and adolescents typically present with complex histories,
the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be made while considering the
presence or absence of multiple other conditions. Despite the need to consider many other
syndromes, differentiation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder from bipolar disorder and
oppositional defiant disorder requires particularly careful assessment.
The central feature differentiating disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and
bipolar disorders in children involves the longitudinal course of the core symptoms. In children,
as in adults, bipolar I disorder and bipolar II disorder manifest as an episodic illness with discrete
episodes of mood perturbation that can be differentiated from the child’s typical presentation.
The mood perturbation that occurs during a manic episode is distinctly different from the child’s
usual mood. In addition, during a manic episode, the change in mood must be accompanied by
the onset, or worsening, of associated cognitive, behavioral, and physical symptoms (e.g.,
distractibility, increased goal-directed activity), which are also present to a degree that is
distinctly different from the child’s usual baseline. Thus, in the case of a manic episode, parents
(and, depending on developmental level, children) should be able to identify a distinct time
period during which the child’s mood and behavior were markedly different from usual. In
contrast, the irritability of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is persistent and is present
over many months; while it may wax and wane to a certain degree, severe irritability is
characteristic of the child with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Thus, while bipolar
disorders are episodic conditions, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is not. In fact, the
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be assigned to a child who has ever
experienced a full-duration hypomanic or manic episode (irritable or euphoric) or who has ever
had a manic or hypomanic episode lasting more than 1 day. Another central differentiating
feature between bipolar disorders and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is the presence of
elevated or expansive mood and grandiosity. These symptoms are common features of mania but
are not characteristic of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
While symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder typically do occur
in children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, mood symptoms of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder are relatively rare in children with oppositional defiant disorder. The key
features that warrant the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder in children whose
symptoms also meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder are the presence of severe and
frequently recurrent outbursts and a persistent disruption in mood between outbursts. In addition,
the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder requires severe impairment in at least
one setting (i.e., home, school, or among peers) and mild to moderate impairment in a second
setting. For this reason, while most children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder will also have a presentation that meets criteria for oppositional defiant
disorder, the reverse is not the case. That is, in only approximately 15% of individuals with
oppositional defiant disorder would criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder be met.
Moreover, even for children in whom criteria for both disorders are met, only the diagnosis of
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made. Finally, both the prominent mood
symptoms in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and the high risk for depressive and anxiety
disorders in follow-up studies justify placement of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
among the depressive disorders in DSM-5. (Oppositional defiant disorder is included in the
chapter “Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and ConductAttention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and
autism spectrum disorder.
Intermittent explosive disorder.
182
Disorders.”) This reflects the more prominent mood component among individuals with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, as compared with individuals with oppositional defiant
disorder. Nevertheless, it also should be noted that disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
appears to carry a high risk for behavioral problems as well as mood problems.
Unlike children diagnosed with bipolar disorder or oppositional defiant disorder—for whom a
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be given even if the symptoms meet
diagnostic criteria for that disorder—children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder also can receive a comorbid diagnosis of ADHD, major depressive
disorder, and/or anxiety disorder. However, children whose irritability is present only in the
context of a major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder should receive one of
those diagnoses rather than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Children with disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder may have symptoms that also meet criteria for an anxiety disorder
and can receive both diagnoses, but children whose irritability is manifest only in the context of
exacerbation of an anxiety disorder should receive the relevant anxiety disorder diagnosis rather
than disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. In addition, children with autism spectrum
disorders frequently present with temper outbursts when, for example, their routines are
disturbed. In that instance, the temper outbursts would be considered secondary to the autism
spectrum disorder, and the child should not receive the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder.
Children with symptoms suggestive of intermittent explosive
disorder present with instances of severe temper outbursts, much like children with disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder. However, unlike disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
intermittent explosive disorder does not require the individual’s mood to be persistently irritable
or angry between outbursts. In addition, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder involving
verbal aggression or physical aggression that does not result in damage to property or physical
injury to animals or other individuals occurring at least twice weekly can be made after only 3
months of symptoms, in contrast to the 12-month requirement for disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder. Thus, these two diagnoses should not be made in the same child. For children with
outbursts and intercurrent, persistent irritability, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder should be made.
Comorbidity
Rates of comorbidity in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are extremely high. It is rare to
find individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder alone.
Comorbidity between disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and other DSM-defined
syndromes appears higher than for many other pediatric mental illnesses; the strongest overlap is
with oppositional defiant disorder. Not only is the overall rate of comorbidity high in disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder, but also the range of comorbid illnesses appears particularly
diverse. These children typically present to the clinic with a wide range of disruptive behavior,
mood, anxiety, and even autism spectrum symptoms and diagnoses. However, children withdisruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not have symptoms that meet criteria for bipolar
disorder, as in that context, only the bipolar disorder diagnosis should be made. If children have
symptoms that meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder or intermittent explosive disorder
and
 disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder should be assigned. Also, as noted earlier, the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder should not be assigned if the symptoms occur only in an anxiety-
provoking context, when the routines of a child with autism spectrum disorder or obsessive-
compulsive disorder are disturbed, or in the context of a major depressive episode.
183
Major Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A
. 
Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-
week period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of
the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note:
 Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical
condition.
1
. 
Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either
subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by
others (e.g., appears tearful). (
Note:
 In children and adolescents, can be
irritable mood.)
2
. 
Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of
the day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or
observation).
3
. 
Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of
more than 5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite
nearly every day. (
Note:
 In children, consider failure to make expected weight
gain.)
4
. 
Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5
. 
Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others,
not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6
. 
Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7
. 
Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be
delusional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being
sick).
8
. 
Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day
(either by subjective account or as observed by others).
9
. 
Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideationwithout a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing
suicide.
B
. 
The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C
. 
The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or
another medical condition.
Note:
 Criteria A–C represent a major depressive episode.
Note:
 Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses
from a natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the
feelings of intense sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite,
and weight loss noted in Criterion A, which may resemble a depressive episode.
Although such symptoms may be understandable or considered appropriate to
the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode in addition to the normal
response to a significant loss should also be carefully considered. This decision
inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s
history and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of
loss.
1
D
. 
At least one major depressive episode is not better explained by schizoaffective
disorder and is not superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder,
delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum
and other psychotic disorders.
E
. 
There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
Note:
 This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-like or hypomanic-like
episodes are substance-induced or are attributable to the physiological effects of
another medical condition.
184
Coding and Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for major depressive disorder is based on whether this is a
single or recurrent episode, current severity, presence of psychotic features, and
remission status. Current severity and psychotic features are only indicated if full
criteria are currently met for a major depressive episode. Remission specifiers are
only indicated if the full criteria are not currently met for a major depressive episode.
Codes are as follows:
Severity/course specifier
Single episode
Recurrent
episode
*
Mild (p. 214)
F32.0
F33.0
Moderate (p. 214)
F32.1
F33.1
Severe (p. 214)
F32.2
F33.2
With psychotic features
**
 (pp. 212–213)
F32.3
F33.3
In partial remission (p. 214)
F32.4
F33.41In full remission (p. 214)
F32.5
F33.42
Unspecified
F32.9
F33.9
*
For an episode to be considered recurrent, there must be an interval of at least 2 consecutive months between
separate episodes in which criteria are not met for a major depressive episode. The definitions of specifiers are
found on the indicated pages.
**
If psychotic features are present, code the “with psychotic features” specifier irrespective of episode severity.
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order:
major depressive disorder, single or recurrent episode, severity/psychotic/remission
specifiers, followed by as many of the following specifiers without codes that apply to
the current episode (or the most recent episode if the major depressive disorder is in
partial or full remission). 
Note:
 The specifier “with seasonal pattern” describes the
pattern of recurrent major depressive episodes.
Specify
 if:
With anxious distress
 (pp. 210–211)
With mixed features
 (p. 211)
With melancholic features
 (pp. 211–212)
185
With atypical features
 (p. 212)
With mood-congruent psychotic features
 (p. 213)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features
 (p. 213)
With catatonia
 (p. 213). 
Coding note:
 Use additional code F06.1.
With peripartum onset
 (p. 213)
With seasonal pattern
 (applies to pattern of recurrent major depressive
episodes) (p. 214)
Diagnostic Features
Major depressive disorder is defined by the presence of at least one major depressive episode
occurring in the absence of a history of manic or hypomanic episodes. The essential feature of a
major depressive episode is a period lasting at least 2 weeks during which there is either
depressed mood or the loss of interest or pleasure in all or nearly all activities for most of the day
nearly every day (Criterion A). The individual must also experience at least four additional
symptoms during the same 2-week period, drawn from a list that includes changes in appetite or
weight, sleep, and psychomotor activity; decreased energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt;
difficulty thinking, concentrating, or making decisions; or thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, a
suicide attempt, or a specific plan for suicidal behavior. To count toward a diagnosis of a major
depressive episode, a symptom must either be newly present or have clearly worsened compared
with the individual’s pre-episode status. Moreover, the symptoms must occur nearly every day,
for at least 2 consecutive weeks, with the exception of thoughts of death and suicidal ideation,
which must be recurrent, and attempting suicide or making a specific plan, which only needs tooccur once. The episode must be accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. For some individuals with milder
episodes, functioning may appear to be normal but requires markedly increased effort. The
presenting complaint is often insomnia or fatigue rather than depressed mood or loss of interest;
thus, the failure to probe for accompanying depressive symptoms can result in underdiagnosis.
Fatigue and sleep disturbance are present in a high proportion of cases; psychomotor
disturbances are much less common but are indicative of greater overall severity, as is the
presence of delusional or near-delusional guilt.
The mood in a major depressive episode is often described by the individual as depressed,
sad, hopeless, discouraged, or “down in the dumps” (Criterion A1). In some cases, sadness may
be denied at first but may subsequently be elicited by interview (e.g., by pointing out that the
individual looks as if he or she is about to cry). In some individuals who complain of feeling
“blah,” having no feelings, or feeling anxious, the presence of a depressed mood can be inferred
from the individual’s facial expression and demeanor. Some individuals emphasize somatic
complaints (e.g., bodily aches and pains) rather than reporting feelings of sadness. Many
individuals report or exhibit increased irritability (e.g., persistent anger, a tendency to respond to
events with angry outbursts or blaming others, an exaggerated sense of frustration over minor
matters). In children and adolescents, an irritable or cranky mood may develop rather than a sad
or dejected mood. This presentation should be differentiated from a pattern of irritability when
frustrated.
Diminished interest or pleasure in usual activities is nearly always present, at least to some
degree. Individuals may report feeling less interested in hobbies, “not caring anymore,” or not
feeling any enjoyment in activities that were previously considered pleasurable (Criterion A2).
Family members often notice social withdrawal or neglect of pleasurable avocations (e.g., a
formerly avid golfer no longer plays, a child who used to enjoy soccer finds excuses not to
practice). In some individuals, there is a significant reduction from previous levels of sexual
interest or desire.
186
Appetite change may involve either a reduction or an increase. Some depressed individuals
report that they have to force themselves to eat. Others may eat more and may crave specific
foods (e.g., sweets or other carbohydrates). When appetite changes are severe (in either
direction), there may be a significant loss or gain in weight, or, in children, a failure to make
expected weight gains may be noted (Criterion A3).
Sleep disturbance may take the form of either difficulty sleeping or sleeping excessively
(Criterion A4). When insomnia is present, it typically takes the form of middle insomnia (i.e.,
waking up during the night and then having difficulty returning to sleep) or terminal insomnia
(i.e., waking too early and being unable to return to sleep). Initial insomnia (i.e., difficulty falling
asleep) may also occur. Individuals who present with oversleeping (hypersomnia) may
experience prolonged sleep episodes at night or increased daytime sleep. Sometimes the reason
that the individual seeks treatment is for the disturbed sleep.
Psychomotor changes include agitation (e.g., the inability to sit still, pacing, hand-wringing;
or pulling or rubbing of the skin, clothing, or other objects) or retardation (e.g., slowed speech,
thinking, and body movements; increased pauses before answering; speech that is decreased involume, inflection, amount, or variety of content, or muteness) (Criterion A5). The psychomotor
agitation or retardation must be severe enough to be observable by others and not represent
merely subjective feelings. Individuals who display either psychomotor disturbance (i.e.,
psychomotor agitation or retardation) are likely to have histories of the other.
Decreased energy, tiredness, and fatigue are common (Criterion A6). An individual may
report sustained fatigue without physical exertion. Even the smallest tasks seem to require
substantial effort. The efficiency with which tasks are accomplished may be reduced. For
example, an individual may complain that washing and dressing in the morning are exhausting
and take twice as long as usual. This symptom accounts for much of the impairment resulting
from major depressive disorder, both during acute episodes and when remission is incomplete.
The sense of worthlessness or guilt associated with a major depressive episode may include
unrealistic negative evaluations of one’s worth or guilty preoccupations or ruminations over
minor past failings (Criterion A7). Such individuals often misinterpret neutral or trivial day-to-
day events as evidence of personal defects and have an exaggerated sense of responsibility for
untoward events. The sense of worthlessness or guilt may be of delusional proportions (e.g., an
individual who is convinced that he or she is personally responsible for world poverty). Blaming
oneself for being sick and for failing to meet occupational or interpersonal responsibilities as a
result of the depression is very common and, unless delusional, is not considered sufficient to
meet this criterion.
Many individuals report impaired ability to think, concentrate, or make even minor decisions
(Criterion A8). They may appear easily distracted or complain of memory difficulties. Those
engaged in cognitively demanding pursuits are often unable to function. In children, a
precipitous drop in grades may reflect poor concentration. In elderly individuals, memory
difficulties may be the chief complaint and may be mistaken for early signs of a dementia
(“pseudodementia”). When the major depressive episode is successfully treated, the memory
problems often fully abate. However, in some individuals, particularly elderly persons, a major
depressive episode may sometimes be the initial presentation of an irreversible dementia.
Thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, or suicide attempts (Criterion A9) are common. They
may range from a passive wish not to awaken in the morning or a belief that others would be
better off if the individual were dead, to transient but recurrent thoughts of dying by suicide, to a
specific suicide plan. More severely suicidal individuals may have put their affairs in order (e.g.,
updated wills, settled debts), acquired needed materials (e.g., a rope or a gun), and chosen a
location and time to accomplish the suicide. Motivations for suicide may include a desire to give
up in the face of perceived insurmountable obstacles,
187
an intense wish to end what is perceived as an unending and excruciatingly painful emotional
state, an inability to foresee any enjoyment in life, or the wish to not be a burden to others. The
resolution of such thinking may be a more meaningful measure of diminished suicide risk than
denial of further plans for suicide.
The degree of impairment associated with a major depressive episode varies, but even in
milder cases, there must be either clinically significant distress or some interference in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion B). If impairment is severe, the
individual may lose the ability to function socially or occupationally. In extreme cases, theindividual may be unable to perform minimal self-care (e.g., feeding and clothing self) or to
maintain minimal personal hygiene.
The individual’s report of symptoms may be compromised by difficulties in concentrating,
impaired memory, or a tendency to deny, discount, or explain away symptoms. Information from
additional informants can be especially helpful in clarifying the course of current or prior major
depressive episodes and in assessing whether there have been any manic or hypomanic episodes.
Because major depressive episodes can begin gradually, a review of clinical information that
focuses on the worst part of the current episode may be most likely to detect the presence of
symptoms.
The evaluation of the symptoms of a major depressive episode is especially difficult when
they occur in an individual who also has another medical condition (e.g., cancer, stroke,
myocardial infarction, diabetes, pregnancy). Some of the criterion signs and symptoms of a
major depressive episode are identical to those of another medical condition (e.g., weight loss
with untreated diabetes; fatigue with cancer; hypersomnia early in pregnancy; insomnia later in
pregnancy or the postpartum). Such symptoms count toward a major depressive diagnosis except
when they are clearly and fully attributable to another medical condition. Nonvegetative
symptoms of dysphoria, anhedonia, guilt or worthlessness, impaired concentration or indecision,
and suicidal thoughts should be assessed with particular care in such cases. Definitions of major
depressive episodes that have been modified to include only these nonvegetative symptoms
appear to identify nearly the same individuals as do the full criteria.
Associated Features
Major depressive disorder is associated with high mortality, much of which is accounted for by
suicide; however, it is not the only cause. For example, depressed individuals admitted to nursing
homes have a markedly increased likelihood of death in the first year. Individuals frequently
present with tearfulness, irritability, brooding, obsessive rumination, anxiety, phobias, excessive
worry over physical health, and complaints of pain (e.g., headaches; joint, abdominal, or other
pains). In children, separation anxiety may occur.
Although an extensive literature exists describing neuroanatomical, neuroendocrinological,
and neurophysiological correlates of major depressive disorder, no laboratory test has yielded
results of sufficient sensitivity and specificity to be used as a diagnostic tool for this disorder.
Until recently, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hyperactivity had been the most extensively
investigated abnormality associated with major depressive episodes, and it appears to be
associated with melancholia (a particularly severe type of depression), psychotic features, and
risks for eventual suicide. Molecular studies have also implicated peripheral factors, including
genetic variants in neurotrophic factors and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Additionally,
volumetric and functional magnetic resonance imaging studies provide evidence for
abnormalities in specific neural systems supporting emotion processing, reward seeking, and
emotion regulation in adults with major depression.
Prevalence
Twelve-month prevalence of major depressive disorder in the United States is approximately
7%, with marked differences by age group such that the prevalence in 18- to 29-year-old188
individuals is threefold higher than the prevalence in individuals age 60 years or older. The most
reproducible finding in the epidemiology of major depressive disorder has been a higher
prevalence in females, an effect that peaks in adolescence and then stabilizes. Women experience
approximately twofold higher rates than men, especially between menarche and menopause.
Women report more atypical symptoms of depression characterized by hypersomnia, increased
appetite, and leaden paralysis compared with men.
Systematic reviews show that the 12-month and point prevalence of major depressive
disorder vary eight- to ninefold across global geographic regions. In the United States,
prevalence increased from 2005 to 2015, with steeper rates of increase for youth compared with
older groups. After stratification by ethnoracial groups, non-Hispanic Whites showed a
significant increase in prevalence after adjustment for demographic characteristics, whereas no
significant change in rate of depression was observed among non-Hispanic Blacks or Hispanics.
Development and Course
Major depressive disorder may first appear at any age, but the likelihood of onset increases
markedly with puberty. In the United States, incidence appears to peak in the 20s; however, first
onset in late life is not uncommon.
The course of major depressive disorder is quite variable, such that some individuals rarely,
if ever, experience remission (a period of 2 or more months with no symptoms, or only one or
two symptoms to no more than a mild degree), while others experience many years with few or
no symptoms between discrete episodes. The course of depression may reflect social-structural
adversity associated with poverty, racism, and marginalization.
It is important to distinguish individuals who present for treatment during an exacerbation of
a chronic depressive illness from those whose symptoms developed recently. Chronicity of
depressive symptoms substantially increases the likelihood of underlying personality, anxiety,
and substance use disorders and decreases the likelihood that treatment will be followed by full
symptom resolution. It is therefore useful to ask individuals presenting with depressive
symptoms to identify the last period of at least 2 months during which they were entirely free of
depressive symptoms. Cases in which depressive symptoms are present for more days than not
might warrant an additional diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder.
Recovery from a major depressive episode begins within 3 months of onset for 40% of
individuals with major depression and within 1 year for 80% of individuals. Recency of onset is
a strong determinant of the likelihood of near-term recovery, and many individuals who have
been depressed for only several months can be expected to recover spontaneously. Features
associated with lower recovery rates, other than current episode duration, include psychotic
features, prominent anxiety, personality disorders, and symptom severity.
The risk of recurrence becomes progressively lower over time as the duration of remission
increases. The risk is higher in individuals whose preceding episode was severe, in younger
individuals, and in individuals who have already experienced multiple episodes. The persistence
of even mild depressive symptoms during remission is a powerful predictor of recurrence.
Many bipolar illnesses begin with one or more depressive episodes, and a substantial
proportion of individuals who initially appear to have major depressive disorder will prove, inTemperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Course modifiers.
time, to instead have a bipolar disorder. This is more likely in individuals with onset of the
illness in adolescence, those with psychotic features, and those with a family history of bipolar
illness. The presence of a “with mixed features” specifier also increases the risk for future manic
or hypomanic diagnosis. Major depressive disorder, particularly with psychotic features, may
also transition into schizophrenia, a change that is much more frequent than the reverse.
189
There are no clear effects of current age on the course or treatment response of major
depressive disorder. Some symptom differences exist, though, such that hypersomnia and
hyperphagia are more likely in younger individuals, and melancholic symptoms, particularly
psychomotor disturbances, are more common in older individuals. Depressions with earlier ages
at onset are more familial and more likely to involve personality disturbances. The course of
major depressive disorder within individuals does not generally change with aging. Mean times
to recovery do not change over multiple episodes, and the likelihood of being in an episode does
not generally increase or decrease with time.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Negative affectivity (neuroticism) is a well-established risk factor for the onset
of major depressive disorder, and high levels appear to render individuals more likely to develop
depressive episodes in response to stressful life events.
Adverse childhood experiences, particularly when they are multiple and of
diverse types, constitute a set of potent risk factors for major depressive disorder. Women may
be disproportionately at risk for adverse childhood experiences, including sexual abuse, that may
contribute to the increased prevalence of depression in this group. Other social determinants of
mental health, such as low income, limited formal education, racism, and other forms of
discrimination, are associated with higher risk of major depressive disorder. Stressful life events
are well recognized as precipitants of major depressive episodes, but the presence or absence of
adverse life events near the onset of episodes does not appear to provide a useful guide to
prognosis or treatment selection. Etiologically, women are disproportionately affected by major
risk factors for depression across the life span, including interpersonal trauma.
First-degree family members of individuals with major depressive
disorder have a risk for major depressive disorder two- to fourfold higher than that of the general
population. Relative risks appear to be higher for early-onset and recurrent forms. Heritability is
approximately 40%, and the personality trait neuroticism accounts for a substantial portion of
this genetic liability.
Women may also be at risk for depressive disorders in relation to specific reproductive life
stages, including in the premenstrual period, postpartum, and in perimenopause.
Essentially all major nonmood disorders (i.e., anxiety, substance use, trauma-
and stressor-related, feeding and eating, and obsessive-compulsive and related disorders)
increase the risk of an individual developing depression. Major depressive episodes that develop
against the background of another disorder often follow a more refractory course. Substance use,
anxiety, and borderline personality disorders are among the most common of these, and the
presenting depressive symptoms may obscure and delay their recognition. However, sustainedclinical improvement in depressive symptoms may depend on the appropriate treatment of
underlying illnesses. Chronic or disabling medical conditions also increase risks for major
depressive episodes. Prevalent illnesses such as diabetes, morbid obesity, and cardiovascular
disease are often complicated by depressive episodes, and these episodes are more likely to
become chronic than are depressive episodes in medically healthy individuals.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although there is substantial cross-cultural variation in the prevalence, course, and
symptomatology of depression, a syndrome similar to major depressive disorder can be
identified across diverse cultural contexts. Symptoms commonly associated with depression
across cultural contexts, not listed in the DSM criteria, include social isolation or loneliness,
anger, crying, and diffuse pain. A wide range of other somatic complaints are
190
common and vary by cultural context. Understanding the significance of these symptoms
requires exploring their meaning in local social contexts.
Symptoms of major depressive disorder may be underdetected or underreported, potentially
leading to misdiagnosis, including overdiagnosis of schizophrenia spectrum disorders in some
ethnic and racialized groups facing discrimination. Cross-nationally, higher levels of income
inequality in a society are associated with higher prevalence of major depressive disorder. In the
United States, the chronicity of major depressive disorder appears to be higher among African
Americans and Caribbean Blacks compared with non-Latinx Whites, possibly because of the
impact of racism, discrimination, greater sociostructural adversity, and lack of access to quality
mental health care.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
There are no clear differences between genders in treatment response or functional
consequences. There is some evidence for sex and gender differences in phenomenology and
course of illness. Women tend to experience more disturbances in appetite and sleep, including
atypical features such as hyperphagia and hypersomnia, and are more likely to experience
interpersonal sensitivity and gastrointestinal symptoms. Men with depression, however, may be
more likely than depressed women to report greater frequencies and intensities of maladaptive
self-coping and problem-solving strategies, including alcohol or other drug misuse, risk taking,
and poor impulse control.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Age-adjusted rates of suicide in the United States have increased from 10.5 to 14.0 per 100,000
over the past two decades. An earlier review of the literature indicated that individuals with
depressive illness have a 17-fold increased risk for suicide over the age- and sex-adjusted general
population rate. The likelihood of suicide attempts lessens in middle and late life, although the
risk of death by suicide does not. The possibility of suicidal behavior exists at all times during
major depressive episodes. The most consistently described risk factor is a past history of suicide
attempts or threats, but it should be remembered that most deaths by suicide are not preceded byManic episodes with irritable mood or with mixed features.
Bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, or other specified bipolar and related disorder.
Depressive disorder due to another medical condition.
nonfatal attempts. Anhedonia has a particularly strong association with suicidal ideation. Other
features associated with an increased risk for death by suicide include being single, living alone,
social disconnectedness, early life adversity, availability of lethal methods such as a firearm,
sleep disturbance, cognitive and decision-making deficits, and having prominent feelings of
hopelessness. Women attempt suicide at a higher rate than men, while men are more likely to
complete suicide. The difference in suicide rate between men and women with depressive
disorders is smaller than in the population as a whole, however. Comorbidities, including
aggressive-impulsive traits, borderline personality disorder, substance use disorder, anxiety,
other medical conditions, and functional impairment, increase risk for future suicidal behavior.
Functional Consequences of Major Depressive Disorder
Many of the functional consequences of major depressive disorder derive from individual
symptoms. Impairment can be very mild, such that many of those who interact with the affected
individual are unaware of depressive symptoms. Impairment may, however, range to complete
incapacity such that the depressed individual is unable to attend to basic self-care needs or is
mute or catatonic. For individuals seen in general medical settings, those with major depressive
disorder have more pain and physical illness and greater decreases in physical, social, and role
functioning. Depressed women report greater functional impairment in their relationships than
men.
191
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive episodes with prominent
irritable mood may be difficult to distinguish from manic episodes with irritable mood or with
mixed features. This distinction requires a careful clinical evaluation of the presence of sufficient
manic symptoms to meet threshold criteria (i.e., three if mood is manic, four if mood is irritable
but not manic).
Major depressive
episodes along with a history of a manic or hypomanic episode preclude the diagnosis of major
depressive disorder. Major depressive episodes with a history of hypomanic episodes and
without a history of manic episodes indicate a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, whereas major
depressive episodes with a history of manic episodes (with or without hypomanic episodes)
indicate a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. On the other hand, presentations of major depressive
episodes with a history of periods of hypomania that do not meet criteria for a hypomanic
episode may be diagnosed as either other specified bipolar and related disorder or major
depressive disorder depending on where the clinician judges the presentation to best fall. For
example, the presentation may be best considered other specified bipolar and related disorder
because of the clinical significance of the subthreshold hypomanic symptoms, or the presentation
may be best considered a case of major depressive disorder with some subthreshold hypomanic
symptoms in between episodes.
A diagnosis of depressive disorder due to
another medical condition requires the presence of an etiological medical condition. MajorSubstance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
Persistent depressive disorder.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Major depressive episodes superimposed on schizophrenia, delusional disorder,
schizophreniform disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder.
Schizoaffective disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Adjustment disorder with depressed mood.
depressive disorder is not diagnosed if the major depressive–like episodes are all attributable to
the direct pathophysiological consequence of a specific medical condition (e.g., multiple
sclerosis, stroke, hypothyroidism).
This disorder is distinguished from major
depressive disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin)
appears to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance. For example, depressed mood that
occurs only in the context of withdrawal from cocaine would be diagnosed as cocaine-induced
depressive disorder.
Persistent depressive disorder is characterized by depressed mood,
more days than not, for at least 2 years. If criteria are met for both major depressive disorder and
persistent depressive disorder, both can be diagnosed.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder is characterized by dysphoric
mood that is present in the final week before the onset of menses, that starts to improve within a
few days after the onset of menses, and that becomes minimal or absent in the week postmenses.
By contrast, the episodes of major depressive disorder are not temporally connected to the
menstrual cycle.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by
severe, recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally and/or behaviorally, accompanied by
persistent or labile mood, most of the day, nearly every day, in between the outbursts. In
contrast, in major depressive disorder, irritability is confined to the major depressive episodes.
Depressive symptoms may be present during schizophrenia, delusional disorder,
schizophreniform disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder. Most commonly, such depressive symptoms can be considered associated
features of these disorders and do not merit a
192
separate diagnosis. However, when the depressive symptoms meet full criteria for a major
depressive episode, a diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder may be made in addition to
the diagnosis of the psychotic disorder.
Schizoaffective disorder differs from major depressive disorder, with
psychotic features, by the requirement that in schizoaffective disorder, delusions or
hallucinations are present for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major depressive episode.
Distractibility and low frustration tolerance can occur in
both attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and a major depressive episode; if the
criteria are met for both, ADHD may be diagnosed in addition to the mood disorder. However,
the clinician must be cautious not to overdiagnose a major depressive episode in children with
ADHD whose disturbance in mood is characterized by irritability rather than by sadness or loss
of interest.
A major depressive episode that occurs in response to a
psychosocial stressor is distinguished from adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, by theBereavement.
Sadness.
F34.1
fact that the full criteria for a major depressive episode are not met in adjustment disorder.
Bereavement is the experience of losing a loved one to death. It generally triggers
a grief response that may be intense and may involve many features that overlap with symptoms
characteristic of a major depressive episode, such as sadness, difficulty sleeping, and poor
concentration. Features that help differentiate a bereavement-related grief response from a major
depressive episode include the following: the predominant affects in grief are feelings of
emptiness and loss, whereas in a major depressive episode they are persistent depressed mood
and a diminished ability to experience pleasure. Moreover, the dysphoric mood of grief is likely
to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves that tend to be associated with
thoughts or reminders of the deceased, whereas the depressed mood in a major depressive
episode is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations. It is important to
note that in a vulnerable individual (e.g., someone with a past history of major depressive
disorder), bereavement may trigger not only a grief response but also the development of an
episode of depression or the worsening of an existing episode.
Finally, periods of sadness are inherent aspects of the human experience. These
periods should not be diagnosed as a major depressive episode unless criteria are met for severity
(i.e., five out of nine symptoms), duration (i.e., most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2
weeks), and clinically significant distress or impairment. The diagnosis other specified
depressive disorder may be appropriate for presentations of depressed mood with clinically
significant impairment that do not meet criteria for duration or severity.
Comorbidity
Other disorders with which major depressive disorder frequently co-occurs are substance-related
disorders, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, obsessive-
compulsive disorder, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and borderline personality disorder.
While women are more likely than men to report comorbid anxiety disorders, bulimia
nervosa, and somatoform disorder (somatic symptom and related disorders), men are more likely
to report comorbid alcohol and substance abuse.
193
Persistent Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic major
depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder.
A
. 
Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated by
either subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.
Note:
 In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and duration must be at
least 1 year.
B
. 
Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following:1
. 
Poor appetite or overeating.
2
. 
Insomnia or hypersomnia.
3
. 
Low energy or fatigue.
4
. 
Low self-esteem.
5
. 
Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.
6
. 
Feelings of hopelessness.
C
. 
During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) of the disturbance,
the individual has never been without the symptoms in Criteria A and B for more
than 2 months at a time.
D
. 
Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years.
E
. 
There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
F
. 
The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder,
schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified
schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
G
. 
The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
hypothyroidism).
H
. 
The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note:
 If criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a major depressive episode at any
time during the 2-year period of depressed mood, then a separate diagnosis of major
depression should be made in addition to the diagnosis of persistent depressive
disorder along with the relevant specifier (e.g., with intermittent major depressive
episodes, with current episode).
Specify
 if:
With anxious distress
 (pp. 210–211)
With atypical features
 (p. 212)
Specify
 if:
In partial remission
 (p. 214)
In full remission
 (p. 214)
Specify
 if:
Early onset:
 If onset is before age 21 years.
Late onset:
 If onset is at age 21 years or older.
Specify
 if (for most recent 2 years of persistent depressive disorder):
With pure dysthymic syndrome:
 Full criteria for a major depressive episode
have not been met in at least the preceding 2 years.
With persistent major depressive episode:
 Full criteria for a major depressive
episode have been met throughout the preceding 2-year period.
194With intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode:
 Full
criteria for a major depressive episode are currently met, but there have been
periods of at least 8 weeks in at least the preceding 2 years with symptoms
below the threshold for a full major depressive episode.
With intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode:
 Full
criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met, but there has been
one or more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years.
Specify
 current severity:
Mild
 (p. 214)
Moderate
 (p. 214)
Severe
 (p. 214)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of persistent depressive disorder is a depressed mood that occurs for most
of the day, for more days than not, for at least 2 years, or at least 1 year for children and
adolescents (Criterion A). This disorder represents a consolidation of DSM-IV-defined chronic
major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder. Major depression may precede persistent
depressive disorder, and major depressive episodes may occur during persistent depressive
disorder. Individuals whose symptoms meet major depressive disorder criteria for 2 years should
be given a diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder as well as major depressive disorder.
Individuals with persistent depressive disorder describe their mood as sad or “down in the
dumps.” During periods of depressed mood, at least two of the six symptoms from Criterion B
are present. Because these symptoms have become a part of the individual’s day-to-day
experience, particularly in the case of early onset (e.g., “I’ve always been this way”), they may
not be reported unless the individual is directly prompted. During the 2-year period (1 year for
children or adolescents), any symptom-free intervals that have occurred have lasted no longer
than 2 months (Criterion C).
Prevalence
Persistent depressive disorder is effectively an amalgam of DSM-IV dysthymic disorder and
chronic major depressive episode. The 12-month prevalence in the United States is
approximately 0.5% for dysthymic disorder and 1.5% for chronic major depressive disorder,
with prevalence among women approximately 1.5 and 2 times higher than prevalence among
men for each of these diagnoses, respectively. Based on studies using comparable ascertainment
procedures, the lifetime and 12-month estimates of DSM-IV dysthymia may be higher in high-
income than in low- and middle-income countries. However, the disorder is associated with
elevated risk of suicidal outcomes and comparable levels of disability wherever it occurs.
Development and Course
Persistent depressive disorder often has an early and insidious onset (i.e., in childhood,
adolescence, or early adult life) and, by definition, a chronic course. Borderline personality
disorder is a particularly robust risk factor for persistent depressive disorder. When persistentTemperamental.
Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
depressive disorder and borderline personality disorder coexist, the covariance of the
corresponding features over time suggests the operation of a common mechanism. Early onset
(i.e., before age 21 years) is associated with a higher likelihood of comorbid personality
disorders and substance use disorders.
When symptoms rise to the level of a major depressive episode, they are likely to
subsequently revert to a lower level. However, depressive symptoms are much less likely to
resolve fully in a given period of time in the context of persistent depressive disorder than they
are in a nonchronic major depressive episode.
195
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Factors predictive of poorer long-term outcome include higher levels of negative
affectivity (neuroticism), greater symptom severity, poorer global functioning, and presence of
anxiety disorders or conduct disorder.
Childhood risk factors include parental loss or separation and childhood
adversity.
There are no clear differences in illness development, course, or family
history between DSM-IV dysthymic disorder and chronic major depressive disorder. Earlier
findings pertaining to either disorder are therefore likely to apply to persistent depressive
disorder. It is thus likely that individuals with persistent depressive disorder will have a higher
proportion of first-degree relatives with persistent depressive disorder than do individuals with
nonchronic major depressive disorder, and more depressive disorders in general.
A number of brain regions (e.g., prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, amygdala,
hippocampus) have been implicated in persistent depressive disorder. Possible
polysomnographic abnormalities exist as well.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The perceived abnormality or tolerance of chronic depressive symptoms may vary across
cultures, affecting symptom detection and treatment acceptability. For example, some social
groups or age cohorts may consider long-standing depressive symptoms to be normal reactions
to adversity.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Persistent depressive disorder is associated with elevated risk of suicidal outcomes and
comparable levels of disability, whether the disorder occurs in high-, middle-, or low-income
countries.
Functional Consequences of Persistent Depressive Disorder
The degree to which persistent depressive disorder impacts social and occupational functioning
is likely to vary widely, but effects can be as great as or greater than those of major depressive
disorder.Major depressive disorder.
Other specified depressive disorder.
Bipolar I and bipolar II disorders.
Cyclothymic disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
If there is a depressed mood for more days than not plus two or more
persistent depressive disorder Criterion B symptoms for 2 years or more, then the diagnosis of
persistent depressive disorder is made. If the symptom criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a
major depressive episode at any time during this period, then the additional diagnosis of major
depression should be made. The comorbid presence of major depressive episodes during this
period should also be noted by assigning the appropriate course specifier to the persistent
depressive disorder diagnosis as follows: If the individual’s symptoms currently meet full criteria
for a major depressive episode, and there have been periods of at least 8 weeks in at least the
preceding 2 years with symptoms below the threshold for a full major depressive episode, then
the specifier “with intermittent major depressive episodes, with current episode” would be
assigned. If full criteria for a major depressive episode are not currently met but there has been
one or more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years, then the specifier “with
intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode” is assigned. If a major
depressive episode
196
has persisted for at least a 2-year duration and remains present, then the specifier “with persistent
major depressive episode” is used. If the individual has not experienced an episode of major
depression in the last 2 years, then the specifier “with pure dysthymic syndrome” is used.
Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include
symptoms (i.e., markedly diminished interest or pleasure in activities; psychomotor agitation or
retardation; recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, suicide attempt or plan) that are absent
from the symptom list for persistent depressive disorder (i.e., depressed mood and two out of six
Criterion B symptoms), a very limited number of individuals will have depressive symptoms that
have persisted longer than 2 years but that do not meet criteria for persistent depressive disorder.
If full criteria for a major depressive episode have been met at some point during the current
episode of illness, a diagnosis of major depressive disorder would apply. Otherwise, a diagnosis
of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder should be given.
A history of a manic or hypomanic episode precludes the
diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder. A history of manic episodes (with or without
hypomanic episodes) indicates a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. A history of hypomanic episodes
(without any history of manic episodes in individuals with persistent depressive presentations
during which criteria have been met for a major depressive episode) warrants a diagnosis of
bipolar II disorder. Other specified bipolar disorder applies to individuals whose presentations
include a history of hypomanic episodes along with persistent depressive presentation that has
never met full criteria for a major depressive episode.
A diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder precludes the diagnosis of persistent
depressive disorder. Thus, if during the period lasting at least 2 years of depressed mood for most
of the day, for more days than not, 1) there are numerous periods with hypomanic symptoms that
do not meet criteria for a hypomanic episode, 2) there have not been any symptom-free periods
of more than 2 months at a time, and 3) criteria have never been met for a major depressive,
manic, or hypomanic episode, then the diag-nosis would be cyclothymic disorder instead ofPsychotic disorders.
Depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder.
Personality disorders.
F32.81
persistent depressive disorder.
Depressive symptoms are a common associated feature of chronic psychotic
disorders (e.g., schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder). A separate
diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder is not made if the symptoms occur only during the
course of the psychotic disorder (including residual phases).
Persistent depressive
disorder must be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another
medical condition. The diagnosis is depressive or bipolar and related disorder due to another
medical condition if the mood disturbance is judged, based on history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings, to be attributable to the direct pathophysiological effects of a specific,
usually chronic, medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis). If it is judged that the depressive
symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition, then the
primary mental disorder (e.g., persistent depressive disorder) is recorded, and the medical
condition is noted as a concomitant medical condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus).
A substance/medication-
induced depressive or bipolar and related disorder is distinguished from persistent depressive
disorder when a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin) is judged to be
etiologically related to the mood disturbance.
A personality disorder is characterized by an enduring pattern of inner
experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the expectations of the
197
individual’s culture, with onset by adolescence or early adulthood. Personality disorders
commonly co-occur with persistent depressive disorder. If criteria are met for persistent
depressive disorder and a personality disorder, both may be diagnosed.
Comorbidity
In comparison to individuals with major depressive disorder, those with persistent depressive
disorder are at higher risk for psychiatric comorbidity in general, and for anxiety disorders,
substance use disorders, and personality disorders in particular. Early-onset persistent depressive
disorder is strongly associated with DSM-5 Cluster B and C personality disorders.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A
. 
In the majority of menstrual cycles, at least five symptoms must be present in the
final week before the onset of menses, start to 
improve
 within a few days after
the onset of menses, and become 
minimal
 or absent in the week postmenses.
B
. 
One (or more) of the following symptoms must be present:1
. 
Marked affective lability (e.g., mood swings; feeling suddenly sad or tearful, or
increased sensitivity to rejection).
2
. 
Marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts.
3
. 
Marked depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or self-deprecating
thoughts.
4
. 
Marked anxiety, tension, and/or feelings of being keyed up or on edge.
C
. 
One (or more) of the following symptoms must additionally be present, to reach a
total of 
five
 symptoms when combined with symptoms from Criterion B above.
1
. 
Decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school, friends, hobbies).
2
. 
Subjective difficulty in concentration.
3
. 
Lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy.
4
. 
Marked change in appetite; overeating; or specific food cravings.
5
. 
Hypersomnia or insomnia.
6
. 
A sense of being overwhelmed or out of control.
7
. 
Physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, joint or muscle
pain, a sensation of “bloating,” or weight gain.
Note:
 The symptoms in Criteria A–C must have been met for most menstrual
cycles that occurred in the preceding year.
D
. 
The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or interference with work,
school, usual social activities, or relationships with others (e.g., avoidance of
social activities; decreased productivity and efficiency at work, school, or home).
E
. 
The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of another
disorder, such as major depressive disorder, panic disorder, persistent
depressive disorder, or a personality disorder (although it may co-occur with any
of these disorders).
F
. 
Criterion A should be confirmed by prospective daily ratings during at least two
symptomatic cycles. (
Note:
 The diagnosis may be made provisionally prior to
this confirmation.)
G
. 
The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or another medical
condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
198
Recording Procedures
If symptoms have not been confirmed by prospective daily ratings of at least two symptomatic
cycles, “provisional” should be noted after the name of the diagnosis (i.e., “premenstrual
dysphoric disorder, provisional”).
Diagnostic FeaturesThe essential features of premenstrual dysphoric disorder are the expression of mood lability,
irritability, dysphoria, and anxiety symptoms that occur repeatedly during the premenstrual phase
of the cycle and remit around the onset of menses or shortly thereafter. These symptoms may be
accompanied by behavioral and physical symptoms. Symptoms must have occurred in most of
the menstrual cycles during the past year and must have an adverse effect on work or social
functioning. The intensity and/or expressivity of the accompanying symptoms may be closely
related to social and cultural background characteristics as well as religious beliefs, social
tolerance, attitude toward the female reproductive cycle, and female gender role issues more
generally.
Typically, symptoms peak around the time of the onset of menses. Although it is not
uncommon for symptoms to linger into the first few days of menses, the individual must have a
symptom-free period in the follicular phase after the menstrual period begins. While the core
symptoms include mood and anxiety symptoms, behavioral and somatic symptoms commonly
also occur. However, the presence of somatic and/or behavioral symptoms in the absence of
mood and/or anxious symptoms is not sufficient for a diagnosis. Symptoms are of comparable
severity (but not duration) to those of other mental disorders, such as a major depressive episode
or generalized anxiety disorder. In order to confirm a provisional diagnosis, daily prospective
symptom ratings are required for at least two symptomatic cycles.
Symptoms must cause clinically significant distress and/or an obvious and marked
impairment in the ability to function socially or occupationally in the week prior to menses.
Associated Features
Delusions and hallucinations have been described in the late luteal phase of the menstrual cycle
but are rare.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder in the community has been
estimated at 5.8% based on a large study from Germany. Another study that looked at prevalence
over two menstrual cycles found 1.3% of menstruating women with the disorder in the United
States. Estimates based on retrospective reports are often higher than those based on prospective
daily ratings. Yet, estimates based on a daily record of symptoms for 1–2 months may not be
fully representative, because those with the most severe symptoms may be unable to sustain the
rating process. The most rigorous estimate of premenstrual dysphoric disorder prevalence in the
United States using prospective ratings of two consecutive menstrual cycles was 1.3% for
women whose symptoms met diagnostic criteria, who experienced functional impairment, and
had no co-occurring mental disorder. The prevalence of premenstrual dysphoric disorder
symptoms in adolescent girls may be higher than that observed in adult women.
Development and Course
Onset of premenstrual dysphoric disorder can occur at any point after menarche. Incidence of
new cases over a 40-month follow-up period in Germany is 2.5% (95% confidence interval =
1.7–3.7). Symptoms cease after menopause, although cyclical hormone replacement can trigger
the re-expression of symptoms.Environmental.
Genetic and physiological.
Premenstrual syndrome.
199
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental factors associated with the expression of premenstrual dysphoric
disorder include stress, history of interpersonal trauma, seasonal changes, and sociocultural
aspects of female sexual behavior in general, and female gender roles in particular.
No studies have examined heritability in premenstrual dysphoric
disorder specifically. Estimates for heritability of premenstrual dysphoric symptoms range
between 30% and 80%, although it remains unclear whether the symptoms themselves are
heritable or whether they are simply associated with other heritable factors or traits.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder has been observed in individuals in the United States, Europe,
India, Nigeria, Brazil, and Asia, with a broad prevalence range. Nevertheless, as with most
mental disorders, frequency, intensity, and expressivity of symptoms; perceived consequences;
help-seeking patterns; and management may be significantly influenced by social and cultural
factors, such as a history of sexual abuse or domestic violence, limited social support, and
cultural variations in attitudes toward menstruation.
Diagnostic Markers
As indicated earlier, the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder is appropriately confirmed
by 2 months of prospective symptom ratings. A number of scales, including the Daily Rating of
Severity of Problems and the Visual Analogue Scales for Premenstrual Mood Symptoms, have
undergone validation and are commonly used in clinical trials for premenstrual dysphoric
disorder. The Premenstrual Tension Syndrome Rating Scale has a self-report and an observer
version, both of which have been validated and used widely to measure illness severity in women
who have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
The premenstrual phase has been considered by some to be a risk period for suicide.
Functional Consequences of Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Impairment in social functioning may be manifested by discord in the intimate partner
relationship and problems with children, other family members, or friends that occur only in
association with the premenstrual dysphoric disorder (i.e., as opposed to chronic interpersonal
problems). Impairments in work and health-related quality of life are also prominent. There is
evidence that premenstrual dysphoric disorder can be associated with impairments in function
and health-related quality of life that are on par with those observed in major depressive disorder
and persistent depressive disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Premenstrual syndrome differs from premenstrual dysphoric disorder inDysmenorrhea.
Bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and persistent depressive disorder.
Use of hormonal treatments.
Other medical conditions.
that premenstrual syndrome does not require a minimum of five symptoms nor mood-related
symptomatology, and it is generally considered to be less severe than premenstrual dysphoric
disorder. Premenstrual syndrome may be more common than premenstrual dysphoric disorder;
its estimated prevalence varies with numbers that hover at about 20%. While premenstrual
syndrome shares the feature of symptom expression during the premenstrual phase of the
menstrual cycle, the presence of somatic or
200
behavioral symptoms, without the required affective symptoms, likely meets criteria for
premenstrual syndrome and not for premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Dysmenorrhea is a syndrome of painful menses, but this is distinct from a
syndrome characterized by affective changes. Moreover, symptoms of dysmenorrhea begin with
the onset of menses, whereas symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder, by definition, begin
before the onset of menses, even if they linger into the first few days of menses.
Many women with
(either naturally occurring or substance/medication-induced) bipolar or major depressive disorder
or persistent depressive disorder believe that they have premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
However, when they chart symptoms, they realize that the symptoms do not follow a
premenstrual pattern. Because the onset of menses constitutes a memorable event, they may
report that symptoms occur only during the premenstruum or that symptoms worsen
premenstrually. This is one of the rationales for the requirement that symptoms be confirmed by
daily prospective ratings. The process of differential diagnosis, particularly if the clinician relies
on retrospective symptoms only, is made more difficult because of the overlap between
symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and some other diagnoses. The overlap of
symptoms is particularly salient for differentiating premenstrual dysphoric disorder from major
depressive episodes, persistent depressive disorder, bipolar disorders, and borderline personality
disorder.
Some women who present with moderate to severe premenstrual
symptoms may be using hormonal treatments, including hormonal contraceptives. If such
symptoms occur after initiation of exogenous hormone use, the symptoms may be attributable to
the use of hormones rather than to the underlying condition of premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
If the woman stops hormones and the symptoms disappear, then this is consistent with
substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
Women with chronic medical conditions may experience symptoms of
premenstrual dysphoria. As with any depressive disorder, medical conditions that could better
account for the symptoms should be ruled out, such as thyroid deficiency and anemia.
Comorbidity
A major depressive episode is the most frequently reported previous disorder in individuals
presenting with premenstrual dysphoric disorder. A wide range of medical conditions (e.g.,
migraine, asthma, allergies, seizure disorders) or other mental disorders (e.g., depressive and
bipolar disorders, anxiety disorders, bulimia nervosa, substance use disorders) may worsen in thepremenstrual phase; however, the absence of a symptom-free period during the postmenstrual
interval obviates a diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. These conditions are better
considered premenstrual exacerbation of a current mental disorder or medical condition.
Although the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder should not be assigned in situations
in which an individual experiences only a premenstrual exacerbation of another mental or
physical disorder, it can be considered in addition to the diagnosis of another mental disorder or
medical condition if the individual experiences symptoms and changes in level of functioning
that are characteristic of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and markedly different from the
symptoms experienced as part of the ongoing disorder.
201
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A
. 
A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
picture and is characterized by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest
or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
B
. 
There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
of both (1) and (2):
1
. 
The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a
medication.
2
. 
The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in
Criterion A.
C
. 
The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive disorder that is not
substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent depressive
disorder could include the following:
The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the
symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the
cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence
suggesting the existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-
related episodes).
D
. 
The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E
. 
The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note:
 This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance
intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrantclinical attention.
Coding note:
 The ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-induced
depressive disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
the same class of substance. In any case, an additional separate diagnosis of a
substance use disorder is not given. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid
with the substance-induced depressive disorder, the 4th position character is “1,”
and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-
induced depressive disorder (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced
depressive disorder”). If a moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid
with the substance-induced depressive disorder, the 4th position character is “2,”
and the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe
[substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use
disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy
use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should
record only the substance-induced depressive disorder.
202
ICD-10-CM
With mild use
disorder
With moderate or
severe use
disorder
Without use
disorder
Alcohol
F10.14
F10.24
F10.94
Phencyclidine
F16.14
F16.24
F16.94
Other hallucinogen
F16.14
F16.24
F16.94
Inhalant
F18.14
F18.24
F18.94
Opioid
F11.14
F11.24
F11.94
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
F13.14
F13.24
F13.94
Amphetamine-type substance (or other
stimulant)
F15.14
F15.24
F15.94
Cocaine
F14.14
F14.24
F14.94
Other (or unknown) substance
F19.14
F19.24
F19.94
Specify
 (see 
Table 1
 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,”
which indicates whether “with onset during intoxication” and/or “with onset during
withdrawal” applies to a given substance class; or 
specify
 “with onset after
medication use”):
With onset during intoxication:
 If criteria are met for intoxication with the
substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal:
 If criteria are met for withdrawal from the
substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use:
 If symptoms developed at initiation of
medication, with a change in use of medication, or during withdrawal ofmedication.
Recording Procedures
The name of the substance/medication-induced depressive disorder begins with the specific
substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the depressive
symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set, which is
based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For
substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other (or
unknown) substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an
etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the same code should also be
used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
depressive disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
during withdrawal). For example, in the case of depressive symptoms occurring during
withdrawal in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.24 severe cocaine
use disorder with cocaine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
depressive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.94
phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one
substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of depressive
203
mood symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use
disorder with methylphenidate-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal;
F19.94 dexamethasone-induced depressive disorder, with onset during intoxication).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is a prominent and
persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture and is characterized by
depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities
(Criterion A) that is due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication, or a toxin exposure) (Criterion B). In order to meet criteria for the diagnosis, the
depressive symptoms must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or
withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication, as evidenced by clinical
history, physical examination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B1), and the involved
substance/medication must be capable of producing the depressive symptoms (Criterion B2). In
addition, the depressed symptoms are not better explained by a non-substance/medication-
induced depressive disorder.
Evidence of an independent depressive disorder includes the observation that the depressive
symptoms preceded the onset of substance/medication use, the depressive symptoms persist
beyond a substantial period of time after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication,or there is other evidence that suggests the existence of an independent non-
substance/medication-induced depressive disorder (Criterion C), such as a history of recurrent
non-substance-induced depressive episodes. This diagnosis should not be made when symptoms
occur exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). Finally, the diagnosis requires
that the substance/medication-induced depressive symptoms cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E). The
substance-induced depressive disorder diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of
substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A
predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention.
The two categories of drugs of abuse most likely to cause a substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder are depressants (e.g., intoxication with alcohol, benzodiazepines and other
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs) and stimulants (e.g., withdrawal from amphetamine-type
substances and cocaine). Some medications (e.g., steroids; antihypertensive medications such as
clonidine, guanethidine, methyldopoa, and reserpine; interferon; 
L
-dopa) are especially likely to
cause substance/medication-induced depressive syndromes. Substances implicated in
medication-induced depressive disorder, with varying degrees of evidence, include antibiotics,
antiviral agents (efavirenz), cardiovascular agents (beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers,
retinoic acid derivatives (isotretinoin), antidepressants, anticonvulsants, antimigraine agents
(triptans), antipsychotics, hormonal agents (corticosteroids, oral contraceptives, gonadotropin-
releasing hormone agonists, tamoxifen), chemotherapeutic drugs, and smoking cessation agents
(varenicline). This list is likely to grow as new compounds are synthesized.
Clear clinical histories and careful judgment are essential in determining whether the
substance of abuse or medication is truly associated with induced depressive symptoms or
whether the symptoms are better understood as constituting an independent depressive disorder.
A diagnosis of a substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is most likely if the
individual was taking high doses of a relevant drug of abuse or medication and there is no past
history of independent depressive episodes. For example, a depressive episode that developed in
the context of heavy use of a relevant substance of abuse or within the first several weeks of
beginning alpha-methyldopa (an antihypertensive agent) in an individual with no history of
major depressive disorder would qualify for the diagnosis of a substance- or medication-induced
depressive disorder. In some cases, a previously established condition (e.g., major depressive
disorder, recurrent) can recur while the individual is
204
coincidentally taking a drug or medication that has the capacity to cause depressive
symptoms (e.g., alcohol and/or stimulants in context of heavy use, 
L
-dopa, oral contraceptives).
In all of these cases, the clinician must make a judgment as to whether the medication is
causative in this particular situation.
A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is distinguished from an independent
depressive disorder by the onset or course, or by other factors associated with the substance or
medication use. There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory
findings of use of a drug of abuse or a medication that is capable of producing depressive
symptoms after exposure to, withdrawal from, or intoxication with that substance prior to theonset of the depressive disorder. The neurochemical changes associated with intoxication and
withdrawal states for some substances can be relatively protracted, and thus intense depressive
symptoms can last for a longer period after the cessation of substance use and still be consistent
with a diagnosis of a substance/medication-induced depressive disorder.
Prevalence
The lifetime rate of alcohol- and stimulant-induced depressive episodes has been reported to be
40% or higher among individuals with relevant substance use disorders. However, in a nationally
representative U.S. adult population, the lifetime prevalence of substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder in the absence of a lifetime history of non-substance-induced depressive
disorder was only 0.26%. These data indicate that special care must be taken to search for and
address substance-induced conditions in individuals with alcohol and stimulant use disorders.
Development and Course
A depressive disorder associated with the use of substances (e.g., alcohol, amphetamine-type
substances and/or cocaine, or a prescribed treatment for medical conditions) must have its onset
while the individual is using the substance or during withdrawal, if there is a withdrawal
syndrome associated with the substance. Most often, the depressive disorder has its onset within
the first few weeks or 1 month of heavy use of the substance. Once the substance is discontinued,
the depressive symptoms usually remit within days to several weeks, depending on the half-life
of the substance/medication and the presence of a withdrawal syndrome. If symptoms persist 4
weeks beyond the expected time course of withdrawal of a particular substance/medication, other
causes for the depressive mood symptoms should be considered.
There are several prospective controlled trials examining the association of depressive
symptoms with use of a prescribed medication, but most reports on this topic involve
retrospective series of individuals entering treatment, or participants in large cross-sectional
studies. More studies exist regarding the clinical course of alcohol- and illicit drug–induced
depressions, and most support the contention that the substance-induced conditions are very
likely to fade away within a relatively short time after abstinence. Equally important are
indications that individuals with significant residual depressive symptoms following treatment
for substance use disorders have a greater likelihood of relapse into their substance use.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for substance-induced depressive disorder include a history of antisocial personality
disorder, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder; a history of stressful life events in the past 12
months; a history of prior drug-induced depressions; and a family history of substance use
disorders. In addition, neurochemical changes associated with alcohol and other drugs of abuse
often contribute to depressive and anxiety symptoms during withdrawal that subsequently
influence ongoing substance use and reduce the likelihood of remission of substance use
disorders. The course of substance-induced depressive disorder may be worsened by social-
structural adversity associated with poverty, racism, and marginalization.
205Substance intoxication and withdrawal.
Independent depressive disorder.
Depressive disorder due to another medical condition.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Among individuals with a substance use disorder, the risk for developing a substance-induced
depressive disorder appears to be similar in men and women.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory assays of the suspected substance in the blood or urine are of limited value in
identifying substance-induced depressive disorder because blood and urine levels are often
negative when an individual comes for evaluation, reflecting the fact that substance-induced
depressions can last for up to 4 weeks after use of the drug of abuse or medication has ceased.
Therefore, a positive test value only means that an individual has had recent experience with a
substance but by itself does not establish a time course or other characteristics that are likely to
be associated with substance-induced depressive disorder. However, as is true of most mental
disorders, the most important data in diagnosing these conditions come from a detailed clinical
history and the mental status examination.
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
The risk of suicide attempts is higher among individuals with possible alcohol use disorder
experiencing depressive episodes, whether substance induced or independent of substances, as
compared with control subjects.
Differential Diagnosis
Depressive symptoms occur commonly in substance
intoxication and substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of substance-induced depressive disorder
should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal when
the mood symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. For
example, dysphoric mood is a characteristic feature of cocaine withdrawal. Substance-induced
depressive disorder with onset during withdrawal should be diagnosed instead of cocaine
withdrawal only if the mood disturbance in Criterion A predominates in the clinical picture and
is sufficiently severe to be a separate focus of attention and treatment.
A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is
distinguished from an independent depressive disorder by the fact that even though a substance is
taken in high enough amounts to be possibly etiologically related to the symptoms, if the
depressive syndrome is observed at times other than when the substance or medication is being
used, it should be diagnosed as an independent depressive disorder.
Because individuals with medical conditions
often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must consider the possibility that the
mood symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the medical condition rather
than the medication, in which case depressive disorder due to another medical condition is
diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change
in the treatment for the medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may
be needed to determine empirically whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician
has ascertained that the disturbance is a function of both another medical condition and substance
use or withdrawal, then both diagnoses (i.e., depressive disorder due to another medicalcondition and substance/medication-induced depressive disorder) may be given. When there is
insufficient evidence to determine whether the depressive symptoms are associated with
substance (including a medication) ingestion or withdrawal or with another medical condition or
are independent (i.e., not a function of either a substance or another medical condition), a
diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder is indicated.
206
Comorbidity
In one study using DSM-IV, comparing individuals with independent major depressive disorder
and no comorbid substance use disorder and individuals with substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder, those with substance/medication-induced depressive disorder had higher
rates of comorbidity with any DSM-IV mental disorder; were more likely to have specific
disorders of tobacco use disorder, gambling disorder, and antisocial personality disorder; and
were less likely to have persistent depressive disorder. Compared with individuals with major
depressive disorder and a comorbid substance use disorder, individuals with
substance/medication-induced depressive disorder are more likely to have alcohol or other
substance use disorder; however, they are less likely to have persistent depressive disorder.
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A
. 
A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical
picture and is characterized by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest
or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
B
. 
There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings
that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another
medical condition.
C
. 
The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g.,
adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, in which the stressor is a serious
medical condition).
D
. 
The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E
. 
The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note:
 The ICD-10-CM code depends on the specifier (see below).
Specify
 if:
F06.31 With depressive features:
 Full criteria are not met for a major
depressive episode.
F06.32 With major depressive–like episode:
 Full criteria are met (except
Criterion C) for a major depressive episode.F06.34 With mixed features
: Symptoms of mania or hypomania are also
present but do not predominate in the clinical picture.
Coding note:
 Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
mental disorder (e.g., F06.31 depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism, with
depressive features). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed
separately immediately before the depressive disorder due to the medical condition
(e.g., E03.9 hypothyroidism; F06.31 depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism,
with depressive features).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of depressive disorder due to another medical condition is a prominent and
persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost
all, activities that predominates in the clinical picture (Criterion A) and that is thought to be due
to the physiological effects of another medical condition (Criterion B). In determining whether
the mood disturbance is due to another medical condition, the clinician must first establish the
presence of another medical condition. Further, the clinician must establish that the mood
disturbance is etiologically related to another medical condition through a physiological
207
mechanism. A careful and comprehensive assessment of multiple factors is necessary to make
this judgment. Although there are no infallible guidelines for determining whether the
relationship between the mood disturbance and another medical condition is etiological, several
considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a
temporal association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of another medical condition
and that of the mood disturbance. A second consideration is the presence of features that are
atypical of independent depressive disorders (e.g., atypical age at onset or course or absence of
family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests that there can be a direct association
between another medical condition in question and the development of mood symptoms can
provide a useful context in the assessment of a particular situation.
Associated Features
Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to another medical condition based on best clinical evidence)
is the key variable in depressive disorder due to another medical condition. The listing of the
medical conditions that are said to be able to induce major depression is never complete, and the
clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis.
There are clear associations, as well as some neuroanatomical correlates, of depression with
cerebrovascular accident (CVA), Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and traumatic brain
injury (TBI). Among the neuroendocrine conditions most closely associated with depression are
Cushing’s syndrome and hypothyroidism. Autoimmune disorders, such systemic lupus
erythematosus, and deficiencies of certain vitamins, such as vitamin B
12
, have also been linked
to depression. There are numerous other conditions thought to be associated with depression,
such as multiple sclerosis. However, the literature’s support for a causal association is greaterwith some conditions than with others. Currently, there is support for a direct pathophysiological
mechanism for depressive symptoms in focal lesions (CVA, TBI, neoplasm) affecting certain
brain regions, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome,
and pancreatic cancer.
Prevalence
Sex differences in prevalence depend somewhat on the sex difference associated with the
medical condition (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus is more common in women; stroke is
somewhat more common in middle-age men compared with women).
Development and Course
Following stroke, the onset of depression appears to be acute, occurring within a few days of the
CVA in the largest case series. However, in some cases, onset of the depression is weeks to
months following the CVA. In the largest series, the duration of the major depressive episode
following stroke was 9–11 months on average. With Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s
disease, depression often precedes the major motor impairments and cognitive impairments
associated with each condition. This is more prominently the case for Huntington’s disease, in
which depression is considered to be the first neuropsychiatric symptom. There is some
observational evidence that depression is less common as the neurocognitive disorder due to
Huntington’s disease progresses. In some individuals with static brain injuries and other central
nervous system diseases, mood symptoms may be episodic (i.e., recurring) over the course of the
disorder. In Cushing’s syndrome and hypothyroidism, depression can be an early manifestation
of the disease. In pancreatic cancer, depression often precedes other features.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The risk of acute onset of a major depressive disorder following a CVA (within 1 day to a week
of the event) appears to be strongly correlated with lesion location, with greatest risk associated
with left frontal strokes and least risk apparently associated with right frontal lesions
208
in those individuals who present within days of the stroke. The association with frontal regions
and laterality is not observed in depressive states that occur in the 2–6 months following stroke,
perhaps indicative of later depressive symptoms representing major depressive disorder,
adjustment disorder, or demoralization. In individuals with Parkinson’s disease, early age at
onset, greater burden of motor symptoms, and longer duration of the disease have been
associated with depression. Risk of depression after TBI has been associated with female gender,
prior depressive disorder, early psychiatric symptoms following injury, lower brain volume, and
unemployment.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Women may be at differentially higher risk for developing depression in the setting of
cardiovascular disease, particularly poststroke.Depressive disorders not due to another medical condition.
Medication-induced depressive disorder.
Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
Adjustment disorders.
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid levels in
blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can be associated
with manic or depressive syndromes).
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
There are no epidemiological studies that provide evidence to differentiate the risk of suicide
from a major depressive episode due to another medical condition compared with the risk from a
major depressive episode in general. There are case reports of suicides in association with major
depressive episodes associated with another medical condition. There is a clear association
between serious medical illnesses and suicide, particularly shortly after onset or diagnosis of the
illness. Thus, it would be prudent to assume that the risk of suicide for major depressive episodes
associated with medical conditions is not less than that for other forms of major depressive
episode, and might even be greater.
Differential Diagnosis
Determination of whether a medical
condition accompanying a depressive disorder is causing the disorder depends on a) the absence
of an episode(s) of depressive episodes prior to the onset of the medical condition, b) the
probability that the associated medical condition has a potential to promote or cause a depressive
disorder, and c) a course of the depressive symptoms shortly after the onset or worsening of the
medical condition, especially if the depressive symptoms remit near the time that the medical
disorder is effectively treated or remits.
An important caveat is that some medical conditions are
treated with medications (e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic
symptoms. In these cases, clinical judgment, based on all the evidence in hand, is the best way to
try to separate the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e.,
association with the medical condition vs. a substance-induced syndrome).
A separate diagnosis of depressive disorder due
to another medical condition is not given if the depressive disturbance occurs exclusively during
the course of a delirium. However, a diagnosis of depressive disorder due to another medical
condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder if the
depressive disturbance is judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process
causing the neurocognitive disorder and if symptoms of depression are a prominent part of the
clinical presentation.
It is important to differentiate a depressive episode from an adjustment
disorder, as the onset of the medical condition is in itself a life stressor that could
209
bring on either an adjustment disorder or an episode of major depression. The major
differentiating elements are the pervasiveness of the depressive picture and the number and
quality of the depressive symptoms that the individual reports or demonstrates on the mentalDemoralization.
status examination. The differential diagnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but
largely beyond the scope of the present manual.
Demoralization is a common reaction to chronic medical illness. It is marked by
a sense of subjective incompetence, helplessness, and hopelessness, and a desire to give up. It is
often accompanied by depressive symptoms such as low mood and fatigue. Demoralization
typically lacks the anhedonia associated with depressive disorder due to another medical
condition, and individuals will generally find pleasure in previously meaningful activities and be
able to experience moments of happiness.
Comorbidity
Conditions comorbid with depressive disorder due to another medical condition are those
associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. It has been noted that delirium
can occur before or along with depressive symptoms in individuals with a variety of medical
conditions, such as Cushing’s disease. The association of anxiety symptoms, usually generalized
symptoms, is common in depressive disorders, regardless of cause.
Other Specified Depressive Disorder
F32.89
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a
depressive disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the depressive disorders diagnostic class
and do not meet criteria for adjustment disorder with depressed mood or adjustment
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. The other specified depressive
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate
the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific
depressive disorder. This is done by recording “other specified depressive disorder”
followed by the specific reason (e.g., “short-duration depressive episode”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified”
designation include the following:
1
. 
Recurrent brief depression:
 Concurrent presence of depressed mood and at
least four other symptoms of depression for 2–13 days at least once per month
(not associated with the menstrual cycle) for at least 12 consecutive months in
an individual whose presentation has never met criteria for any other depressive
or bipolar disorder and does not currently meet active or residual criteria for any
psychotic disorder.
2
. 
Short-duration depressive episode (4–13 days):
 Depressed affect and at least
four of the other eight symptoms of a major depressive episode associated with
clinically significant distress or impairment that persists for more than 4 days, but
less than 14 days, in an individual whose presentation has never met criteria for
any other depressive or bipolar disorder, does not currently meet active orresidual criteria for any psychotic disorder, and does not meet criteria for
recurrent brief depression.
3
. 
Depressive episode with insufficient symptoms:
 Depressed affect and at
least one of the other eight symptoms of a major depressive episode associated
with clinically significant distress or impairment that persist for at least 2 weeks in
an individual whose presentation has never met criteria for any other depressive
or bipolar disorder, does not currently meet active or residual criteria for any
psychotic disorder, and does not meet criteria for mixed anxiety and depressive
disorder symptoms.
210
4
. 
Major depressive episode superimposed
 on schizophrenia, schizophreniform
disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorder. 
Note:
 Major depressive episodes that are
part of schizoaffective disorder do not merit an additional diagnosis of other
specified depressive disorder.
Unspecified Depressive Disorder
F32.A
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a
depressive disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the depressive disorders diagnostic class
and do not meet criteria for adjustment disorder with depressed mood or adjustment
disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. The unspecified depressive
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses 
not
 to specify
the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific depressive disorder, and
includes presentations for which there is insufficient information to make a more
specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Unspecified Mood Disorder
F39
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a mood
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not at the
time of the evaluation meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in either the
bipolar or the depressive disorders diagnostic classes and in which it is difficult tochoose between unspecified bipolar and related disorder and unspecified depressive
disorder (e.g., acute agitation).
Specifiers for Depressive Disorders
Specify
 if:
With anxious distress:
 Anxious distress is defined as the presence of at least
two of the following symptoms during the majority of days of the current major
depressive episode (or the most recent major depressive episode if major
depressive disorder is currently in partial or full remission) or current persistent
depressive disorder:
1
. 
Feeling keyed up or tense.
2
. 
Feeling unusually restless.
3
. 
Difficulty concentrating because of worry.
4
. 
Fear that something awful may happen.
5
. 
Feeling that the individual might lose control of himself or herself.
Specify
 current severity:
Mild:
 Two symptoms.
Moderate:
 Three symptoms.
Moderate-severe:
 Four or five symptoms.
Severe:
 Four or five symptoms and with motor agitation.
Note:
 Anxious distress has been noted as a prominent feature of both bipolar
and major depressive disorder in both primary care and specialty mental
health
211
settings. High levels of anxiety have been associated with higher suicide risk,
longer duration of illness, and greater likelihood of treatment nonresponse. As
a result, it is clinically useful to specify accurately the presence and severity
levels of anxious distress for treatment planning and monitoring of response to
treatment.
With mixed features:
A
. 
At least three of the following manic/hypomanic symptoms are present during
the majority of days of the current major depressive episode (or the most
recent major depressive episode if major depressive disorder is currently in
partial or full remission):
1
. 
Elevated, expansive mood.
2
. 
Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
3
. 
More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.4
. 
Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5
. 
Increase in energy or goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or
school, or sexually).
6
. 
Increased or excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential
for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees,
sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
7
. 
Decreased need for sleep (feeling rested despite sleeping less than usual;
to be contrasted with insomnia).
B
. 
Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
person’s usual behavior.
C
. 
For individuals whose symptoms meet full criteria for either mania or
hypomania, the diagnosis should be bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
D
. 
The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
Note:
 Mixed features associated with a major depressive episode have been
found to be a significant risk factor for the development of bipolar I or bipolar II
disorder. As a result, it is clinically useful to note the presence of this specifier
for treatment planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With melancholic features:
A
. 
One of the following is present during the most severe period of the current
major depressive episode (or the most recent major depressive episode if
major depressive disorder is currently in partial or full remission):
1
. 
Loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
2
. 
Lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does not feel much better,
even temporarily, when something good happens).
B
. 
Three (or more) of the following:
1
. 
A distinct quality of depressed mood characterized by profound
despondency, despair, and/or moroseness or by so-called empty mood.
2
. 
Depression that is regularly worse in the morning.
3
. 
Early-morning awakening (i.e., at least 2 hours before usual awakening).
4
. 
Marked psychomotor agitation or retardation.
5
. 
Significant anorexia or weight loss.
6
. 
Excessive or inappropriate guilt.
Note:
 The specifier “with melancholic features” is applied if these features are
present at the most severe stage of the episode. There is a near-complete
absence of the
212
capacity for pleasure, not merely a diminution. A guideline for evaluating the lackof reactivity of mood is that even highly desired events are not associated with
marked brightening of mood. Either mood does not brighten at all, or it brightens
only partially (e.g., up to 20%–40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The
“distinct quality” of mood that is characteristic of the “with melancholic features”
specifier is experienced as qualitatively different from that during a
nonmelancholic depressive episode. A depressed mood that is described as
merely more severe, longer lasting, or present without a reason is not considered
distinct in quality. Psychomotor changes are nearly always present and are
observable by others.
 Melancholic features exhibit only a modest tendency to repeat across episodes
in the same individual. They are more frequent in inpatients, as opposed to
outpatients; are less likely to occur in milder than in more severe major
depressive episodes; and are more likely to occur in individuals with psychotic
features.
With atypical features:
 This specifier is applied when these features
predominate during the majority of days of the current major depressive episode
(or the most recent major depressive episode if major depressive disorder is
currently in partial or full remission) or current persistent depressive disorder.
A
. 
Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual or potential positive
events).
B
. 
Two (or more) of the following:
1
. 
Significant weight gain or increase in appetite.
2
. 
Hypersomnia.
3
. 
Leaden paralysis (i.e., heavy, leaden feelings in arms or legs).
4
. 
A long-standing pattern of interpersonal rejection sensitivity (not limited to
episodes of mood disturbance) that results in significant social or
occupational impairment.
C
. 
Criteria are not met for “with melancholic features” or “with catatonia” during
the same episode.
Note:
 “Atypical depression” has historical significance (i.e., atypical in
contradistinction to the more classical agitated, “endogenous” presentations of
depression that were the norm when depression was rarely diagnosed in
outpatients and almost never in adolescents or younger adults) and today does
not connote an uncommon or unusual clinical presentation as the term might
imply.
 Mood reactivity is the capacity to be cheered up when presented with positive
events (e.g., a visit from children, compliments from others). Mood may become
euthymic (not sad) even for extended periods of time if the external
circumstances remain favorable. Increased appetite may be manifested by an
obvious increase in food intake or by weight gain. Hypersomnia may include
either an extended period of nighttime sleep or daytime napping that totals at
least 10 hours of sleep per day (or at least 2 hours more than when notdepressed). Leaden paralysis is defined as feeling heavy, leaden, or weighted
down, usually in the arms or legs. This sensation is generally present for at least
an hour a day but often lasts for many hours at a time. Unlike the other atypical
features, pathological sensitivity to perceived interpersonal rejection is a trait that
has an early onset and persists throughout most of adult life. Rejection sensitivity
occurs when the person is and is not depressed, though it may be exacerbated
during depressive periods.
With psychotic features:
 Delusions and/or hallucinations are present at any
time in the current major depressive episode (or the most recent major
depressive episode if major depressive disorder is currently in partial or full
remission). If psychotic features are present, 
specify
 if mood-congruent or mood-
incongruent:
213
With mood-congruent psychotic features:
 The content of all delusions and
hallucinations is consistent with the typical depressive themes of personal
inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment.
With mood-incongruent psychotic features:
 The content of the delusions or
hallucinations does not involve typical depressive themes of personal
inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment, or the
content is a mixture of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent themes.
With catatonia:
 This specifier is applied to the current major depressive episode
(or the most recent major depressive episode if major depressive disorder is
currently in partial or full remission) if catatonic features are present during most
of the episode. See criteria for catatonia associated with a mental disorder in the
chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders.”
With peripartum onset:
 This specifier is applied to the current major depressive
episode (or the most recent major depressive episode if major depressive
disorder is currently in partial or full remission) if onset of mood symptoms
occurs during pregnancy or in the 4 weeks following delivery.
Note:
 Mood episodes can have their onset either during pregnancy or
postpartum. About 50% of postpartum major depressive episodes begin prior
to delivery. Thus, these episodes are referred to collectively as 
peripartum
episodes.
 Between conception and birth, about 9% of women will experience a major
depressive episode. The best estimate for prevalence of a major depressive
episode between birth and 12 months postpartum is just below 7%.
 Peripartum-onset mood episodes can present either with or without
psychotic features. Infanticide (a rare occurrence) is most often associated
with postpartum psychotic episodes that are characterized by command
hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions that the infant is possessed, but
psychotic symptoms can also occur in severe postpartum mood episodeswithout such specific delusions or hallucinations.
 Postpartum mood (major depressive or manic) episodes with psychotic
features appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000 deliveries and may be
more common in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum episodes with
psychotic features is particularly increased for women with prior postpartum
psychotic mood episodes but is also elevated for those with a prior history of a
depressive or bipolar disorder (especially bipolar I disorder) and those with a
family history of bipolar disorders.
 Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the
risk of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%.
Postpartum episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the
postpartum period, which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness
or attention.
 Peripartum-onset depressive disorders must be distinguished from the much
more common “maternity blues,” or what is known in lay terms as “baby
blues.” Maternity blues is not considered to be a mental disorder and is
characterized by sudden changes in mood (e.g., the sudden onset of
tearfulness in the absence of depression) that do not cause functional
impairment and that are likely caused by physiological changes occurring after
delivery. It is temporary and self-limited, typically improving quickly (within a
week) without the need for treatment. Other symptoms of maternity blues
include sleep disturbance and even confusion that can occur shortly after
delivery.
 Perinatal women may be at higher risk for depressive disorders due to
thyroid abnormalities as well as other medical conditions that can cause
depressive symptoms. If the depressive symptoms are judged to be due to
another medical condition related to the perinatal period, depressive disorder
due to another medical condition should be diagnosed instead of a major
depressive episode, with peripartum onset.
214
With seasonal pattern:
 This specifier applies to recurrent major depressive
disorder.
A
. 
There has been a regular temporal relationship between the onset of major
depressive episodes in major depressive disorder and a particular time of the
year (e.g., in the fall or winter).
Note:
 Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonally
related psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every
winter).
B
. 
Full remissions also occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g., depression
disappears in the spring).
C
. 
In the last 2 years, two major depressive episodes have occurred thatdemonstrate the temporal seasonal relationships defined above and no
nonseasonal major depressive episodes have occurred during that same
period.
D
. 
Seasonal major depressive episodes (as described above) substantially
outnumber the nonseasonal major depressive episodes that may have
occurred over the individual’s lifetime.
Note:
 The specifier “with seasonal pattern” can apply to the pattern of major
depressive episodes in major depressive disorder, recurrent. The essential
feature is the onset and remission of major depressive episodes at characteristic
times of the year. In most cases, the episodes begin in fall or winter and remit in
spring. Less commonly, there may be recurrent summer depressive episodes.
This pattern of onset and remission of episodes must have occurred during at
least a 2-year period, without any nonseasonal episodes occurring during this
period. In addition, the seasonal depressive episodes must substantially
outnumber any nonseasonal depressive episodes over the individual’s lifetime.
 This specifier does not apply to those situations in which the pattern is better
explained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g., seasonal
unemployment or school schedule). Major depressive episodes that occur in a
seasonal pattern are often characterized by loss of energy, hypersomnia,
overeating, weight gain, and a craving for carbohydrates.
 The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with latitude,
age, and sex. Prevalence increases with higher latitudes. Age is also a strong
predictor of seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for winter depressive
episodes.
Specify
 if:
In partial remission:
 Symptoms of the immediately previous major depressive
episode are present but full criteria are not met, or there is a period lasting less
than 2 months without any significant symptoms of a major depressive episode
following the end of such an episode.
In full remission:
 During the past 2 months, no significant signs or symptoms of
the disturbance were present.
Specify
 current severity:
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those
symptoms, and the degree of functional disability.
Mild:
 Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis
are present, the intensity of the symptoms is distressing but manageable, and
the symptoms result in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate:
 The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/or functional
impairment are between those specified for “mild” and “severe.”
Severe:
 The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of that required to
make the diagnosis, the intensity of the symptoms is seriously distressing and
unmanageable, and the symptoms markedly interfere with social andoccupational functioning.
1
In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in grief the predominant affect is
feelings of emptiness and loss, while in an MDE it is persistent depressed mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or
pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is likely to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of
grief. These waves tend to be associated with thoughts or reminders of the deceased. The depressed mood of an MDE is more
persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations. The pain of grief may be accompanied by positive emotions and
humor that are uncharacteristic of the pervasive unhappiness and misery characteristic of an MDE. The thought content
associated with grief generally features a preoccupation with thoughts and memories of the deceased, rather than the self-critical
or pessimistic ruminations seen in an MDE. In grief, self-esteem is generally preserved, whereas in an MDE feelings of
worthlessness and self-loathing are common. If self-derogatory ideation is present in grief, it typically involves perceived failings
vis-à-vis the deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently enough, not telling the deceased how much he or she was loved). If a bereaved
individual thinks about death and dying, such thoughts are generally focused on the deceased and possibly about “joining” the
deceased, whereas in an MDE such thoughts are focused on ending one’s own life because of feeling worthless, undeserving of
life, or unable to cope with the pain of depression.